hello everybody my name is jay i'm one
of the expert toefl teachers here at e2
language and i'm
joined today by amber from e2 school who
is a pronunciation
expert and she's going to help you with
your toefl speaking scores and how
are you going to do that amber well i'm
going to teach you
along with joe together we're going to
teach you the different pronunciation
rules so pronunciation is made up of a
number of different rules covering
various areas
some of which are included in the toefl
criteria
so some of the main ones to consider are
things like pronunciation of
individual sounds how accurately you can
do that
also things to consider like intonation
the way you make your voice go
up and down and when we look at
different aspects of pronunciation
including fluency stress and rhythm
along with intonation and accuracy all
of these combine
to ensure that you are intelligible now
this simply means that you're clear and
easy to understand
yes yes yes that's what it's all about
all right cool let's get started and dig
into all of these ingredients of english
pronunciation and fluency
so in today's lesson we're going to look
at sounds
fluency intonation word stress and
rhythm all the ingredients of english
pronunciation
let's first look at sounds so
amber if i look at a piece of
english writing like text on a piece of
paper
now the relationship between what is
written
and how we actually say it is really
quite different right
it's profoundly different because
english is not a phonetic
language which means that exactly as you
said
the way we write it is very different
from how we say it
that's frustrating yep but worry not
we're here to tell you how to
unpack and find out the difference
okay take a look at this weird word here
what do you think this word
actually says well if i apply the most
common rules i'm going to say goatee
goatee no it's not goatee
at all in fact let's take a closer look
we could have fur as in cough
right so the gh actually says
what english spelling and pronunciation
is crazy
we can have e as in women
and that's an o so that's weird and we
have
shi as in nation nation
so this actually means fish cool
all right so we can see that english
spelling
can be really really different from how
we
say it and it all comes down to the
alphabet
right so we've got well how many letters
are there in the alphabet oh god i think
there's 24.
two more 26. i knew that magic
yeah so from a to z the alphabet that we
learn
to write with all of us learn this but
what is often not taught is the sound
alphabet so we've got 26 written letters
we've got five vowels a e
e i o and u only five that's good to
know
but well i'm sorry to break the bad news
we've got a
whole lot more english in fact has 20
spoken vowels but why do they tell us in
writing that there are only
five vowels it's a lie
but the good news is that with
consonants there's less of a big
difference
okay so in the written alphabet we've
got 21 consonants
in the spoken or speech alphabet we've
got 24.
so just three more so there's so there's
more sounds than there are letters
precisely and that's the key point to
take away from this
okay so what are we looking at here
amber well this is going to be your best
friend
in terms of pronunciation so we call
this the
phonemic chart and what you can see here
is some words and then also some symbols
as well now some of these symbols you
might recognize they might look a little
bit like the alphabet
others look like a completely foreign
language
now don't worry you don't need to
memorize any of these symbols but it is
just helpful to understand
what they are okay right so these
symbols
are the different sound symbols that we
use
so you can see in the top left corner
we've got the symbol
e as in the word sheep beautiful
to the right we've got the short vowel e
as in ship lovely and then we continue
down
let's look at the bottom right hand
corner we've got this symbol
now this is the sound ow
ow right as in now how
and so on so it's just helpful these
symbols will be in any dictionary
that you use so it's good to know what
they represent
and what they mean okay so with vowels
we have
three different varieties right ah
indeed quite so
so we've got short ones like e we've got
long ones like
e and then we've got those combined ones
like
ow exactly these
just as you you said the combined vowels
are two vowels that we
join together so for example if we take
e and uh they're two short vowels
e as in as in teacher and we kind of
join them together
eat uh
gotcha so when you're thinking about the
difference between
a vowel and a consonant it is as
follows as far as i'm concerned please
correct me if i'm wrong of course
but a vowel is a sound that you make
where you do not use your teeth your
tongue
your lips the roof of your mouth the
throat or any other part of your
anatomy or mouth so ah
it's just coming straight from i don't
know where it's coming from actually
from our lungs from our lungs up
throughout our mouth
wonderful now a consonant conversely
is where we make a sound however we are
using out our
teeth tongue lips
mouth something like that right exactly
exactly
anything that blocks or interrupts the
flow of air
right so that's the difference between a
vowel and a consonant you can tell all
your friends now
so everybody what we can see here it's
very similar to the vowel
chart we saw a second ago here we have
the consonant symbols
in the phonemic chart and under them we
have the words they represent
so the wonderful news for consonants is
that most of the time they're exactly
the same well they look exactly the same
right
so for example the p sound looks the
same as the letter
p uh same with d looks like the letter d
but there are a couple of ones here that
will look a bit different
for example which is in the middle of
the chart in the top row
and it's pair j then in the second row
we've also got
and the as in think and they
and these might be symbols that you
haven't seen before
but once again you don't need to learn
these off by heart it's just helpful to
understand
the sound they represent if you see them
in a dictionary or want to check
i think it's also good to know that it's
finite there are
only a set number there aren't more it's
not infinite right
so you just have to learn the 44 sounds
right the vowels and the consonants and
we'll get to consonant clusters coming
up where there are actually a lot more
but
it's good to know that it's finite
exactly
okay everyone if you want help with your
pronunciation don't forget to click on
the description below and download the
ultimate english pronunciation guide
it's free
it includes everything that we're going
to learn in this
lesson and it will help you enormously
to sound
clearer okay so with these
consonant sounds like p and b
for example
[Music]
there's really very little difference
that's exactly right and
this is actually some more good news
when it comes to pronunciation
16 of the sounds turn into eight
pairs yes so these sounds that you're
talking about
per and for example
everything in my mouth is doing the same
thing it's staying the same the only
difference
is what's happening in our throats
uh-huh is this
is this what's called voiced and
unvoiced you're onto it
that's exactly right so there are two
types of consonant sounds
in english right unvoiced and voiced now
unvoiced means that we are not vibrating
our vocal chords but voiced
we are so a little tip on how to tell
the difference
if we take per and
take your hand put it over your throat
and say these two sounds
now with this first sound you shouldn't
really feel anything
under your fingertips but with the
second you should feel some
vibration okay so let's put it into a
word so if i say
pig versus big pig
big pig so it feels like pig is at the
front of my mouth and it feels like big
is at the or almost in my throat exactly
because that's the key difference
between the two sounds we're turning on
our voice
sometimes it's helpful to think of your
voice like a light switch you turn it on
or you turn it off now this can take a
little bit of practice
if in your first language you don't
commonly do this with
unvoiced and voiced pairs but with a bit
of practice and knowing this tip about
using your hand to check if your vocal
cords are vibrating
you'll be a natural in no time let's do
it let's look at some examples
so let's go through the phonemic chart
and we're going to show you the
different pairs
so there are eight pairs so this means
you only need to learn
eight mouth positions rather than 16.
great
so the first two per and
all right so what we can see here on
screen is a diagram of the mouse and
what the lips are doing
for the pair sounds of per and
b so jay can you do the honours can you
read through
the words with per in them i can i can
say
pie apple shepherd
and pepper magic now what can you see
that's different about the spelling
of the sound well okay so i can see
p for put that's cool that's what they
teach me in primary school
thanks teacher however i see shepard has
a ph
sound a ph spelling but a p sound
exactly so
sometimes the way it's spelt you won't
say all the sounds that you see
so in this case the sound per can be
represented by
the letters p and h but the h is silent
i can also see double p there as well
exactly that's another example so you
don't say
app pull or pep per
it's just the one sound pepper pepper
exactly
got it what about the voiced sound here
so now we want to turn on our throats
and we're going to say
b rabbit
raspberry and bhutan
so again we've got some tricky silent
letters the p
in raspberry is silent there's no p
sound
so you don't say rasp berry right
it's just raspberry okay got it okay so
that's voice
b rabbit raspberry and bhutan
cool so we've looked at per
and ba in a little bit of detail just so
you can help remember the different
pairs
let's go through them now on screen so
we've got to
oh can you stop here this is a really
interesting one
because we have lots of indian students
and it seems to me
that if you are a speaker of an indian
language like
telugu or kannada or malayalam or hindi
there seems to be a difficulty with the
t
sound and that the d sound seems to be
very common
exactly and this is because for many
indian languages
we have a similar sound to the english
and but we call it a retroflex
sound which means that the top of the
tongue is curled back over like
whereas in english we don't curl the
tongue we just want it tapping
the top of the roof of the mouth it's so
weird yeah
and like tiny little differences make a
huge impact with pronunciation
that sounds like a real indian sound
mindset
doesn't it exactly but but in english we
have a lot of t t
sounds that's very true but i think the
comforting thing is
that your tongue can be trained to learn
any sound
in any language you take a baby you put
it in a country and it will grow up
learning to say those sounds nice you
took that same baby
put it in a different country what if
the baby's 35 years old
you can still learn it might take a
little bit longer a little bit of
practice
but it is possible cool so
let's take a look at the other pairs
we've got ch
for
and finally
[Music]
i have to say some of those sounds are
very similar like
they're almost identical but for me
as an english native speaker right
i can hear a big difference if somebody
makes a mistake or doesn't say it
clearly
most definitely so to a learner of
english or student of english
it can feel like the difference is tiny
but
you know when you grow up speaking
english and learning english your ear
becomes attuned to these differences
and they sound really big to us i think
a good analogy would be like somebody
who plays guitar and somebody who's
playing in
tune right and you're like wow that
sounds perfect that's amazing versus
somebody who plays it and you're like
oh it's not quite right there's
something a little bit wrong there
you hear that note out of tune and you
notice it instantly
nice doesn't mean the music can't still
be enjoyable if you make a little
pronunciation mistake here and there
but you know for the purpose of practice
it's good to fine-tune and try and be as
accurate as possible
yeah especially if you're taking an
english test tests
yes yeah very important for tests okay
so
let's play a little game these are the
unvoiced sounds which are
pe and we have voiced sounds here
and what i want you to do is to match
the unvoiced sound with the voiced
sound to make a little pair you have 10
seconds
all right let's go through the answers
now so the pairs are
put
[Music]
tiny little differences but they make a
big
difference in the end definitely
jay what's wrong well
i speak just imagine this i speak
portuguese brazilian portuguese and this
is very confusing because there's so
many sounds and i don't know which
sounds i have in my first language
versus what sounds are in english
what am i to do well worry not we've
done the hard work
for you yes so part of our pronunciation
course
involves creating a plan of which sounds
will be especially helpful for you to
practice
as a learner of the english sounds so
let's take that example
you speak portuguese yes let me show you
what your plan
would look like cool now for this
example we're going to focus
specifically on brazilian portuguese as
the portuguese
spoken in portugal has slightly
different rules
right but if you're watching this at
home and you speak another language just
hold on because
what we're going to talk about is
relevant for you as well
even though you may not speak brazilian
portuguese but keep watching
okay so if we compare english with
portuguese
you'll notice that we're looking at the
vowels and the consonants
so english on the left has actually got
more vowels
and more consonants so if you're a
speaker of brazilian portuguese
this means you're going to need to learn
some new sounds
right entirely new sounds this this
means that they're going to have to
learn a new way to move their mouth and
to make an earth
well maybe not quite like that but
you're on the right track right
so let's take a look at the phonemic
chart again
but designed for portuguese and english
so these vowels that you see here
these are the same in brazilian
portuguese so the good news is
you don't need to learn them you already
know them and
no matter what first language you speak
there will be some overlapping
sounds right okay so for example in the
bottom right hand corner we've got
the portuguese word mao which means bad
but that's exactly the same vowel sound
as in english identical sounds identical
sounds
cool that's easy now
we're going to look at sounds that are
not identical but they're similar
okay so this means your tongue is
already doing almost the right thing it
just needs a few
tiny little changes and do you think uh
this is the reason why some people have
accents yes
exactly because you apply the
pronunciation rules from your first
language
to your second third or fourth languages
okay that's why we hear accents
uh interesting now are accents a big
problem
let me just talk about tests for a
minute here now
accents are not an issue you are allowed
to have your brazilian portuguese accent
or your hindi accent or whatever accent
you have
everybody's got an accent okay the
problem is when your accent is
thick and it actually the sound you're
making then is sort of
incorrect you might be making a v what
mistake or
mistake exactly so i think by no means
do we want to discourage anybody from
embracing and celebrating your accent
it's a sign of where you'll come from
and yes your journey to learning english
yes but being able to pronounce the
correct
sounds is really important to ensure
that your language is clear
yes and easy to understand nice
oh my god so what are these red ones
this doesn't look good amber
well the good news is there are only
four of these red ones
but you're right these vowels you're
gonna have to learn
because portuguese doesn't have these
four okay
but over on e2 school with our
pronunciation course we have a lesson
for each of these sounds and lots of
practice activities
so how do i get to this e2 school
website to take the pronunciation course
which must be amazing
oh well it's quite simple you just head
on over to
www.e2
and sign up for free perfect what you
can see here
is the table of consonants that are the
same
in portuguese right and then
you can see here the similar ones okay
and finally four that you will need
to learn and practice so this means
portuguese speakers will struggle to say
horse as in her as in horse right
exactly
exactly and this doesn't necessarily
mean that the sound
does not exist in portuguese it just
means that it's
very different for example the english
r sound as in read is very different
from the portuguese
and now i am not as good as yes as you
are
the rolled or trilled are very
interesting now let's say i speak
hindi right so the same thing will apply
here that
some sounds will be exactly the same
some sounds will be
similar and some sounds i just
won't have and conversely let's say i'm
going to learn
hindi from english the same thing will
happen if i go from
english to hindi in hindi they'll be the
same sounds
they'll be similar sounds and then i'm
going to have to learn hindi sounds that
i
just do not have correct exactly that's
it
but the good news is that on speaking
lab
we design a study plan for you so
we will give you a roadmap to the sounds
that are the same
similar and different great so i don't
have to waste time studying sounds that
i
already know and the other thing that
we're going to do if you're watching
this on youtube you should click the
subscribe
button because we're going to release
videos and all different
first languages cool here very exciting
okay so what are some other ways to
practice all of these different sounds
in english
well there are actually some really fun
ways to do it because learning
pronunciation can be
a lot of fun yeah so one of the best
ways
is actually through minimal pairs if you
think about learning pronunciation like
going to the gym
this is your weightlifting okay activity
i
clearly go to the gym well
your tongue will be going to the gym by
the end of this activity
so a minimal pair is when just one sound
changes between a pair of words okay so
what we have here is
bus and buzz so the only difference is
we've got two more examples here pence
and pens
so once again this tiny difference can
make a huge
difference in terms of meaning pants
and pens i tell you what that's a really
important one too because in english we
have these things called plural nouns
right
yes so we have apple and apples
actually do we say sir what do we say
apples depends on the word apples
yeah that's the voiced one there oh very
interesting
but right and you know if you are not
saying this sound loud enough
it could sound like the singular noun so
good pronunciation will improve your
grammar as well
okay hang on let me get this right so
let's say i'm taking an english
test and i my pronunciation isn't very
good it could affect my grammar score
indeed because the examiner may hear you
say a word and if you're
not pronouncing all the different
aspects of the word it sounds like
you're not saying them
crazy let's keep going
all right and then we've got one more
minimal pair we've got ice
and eyes so this is a great way to
practice to really improve your accuracy
now another really fun way to practice
is what's this called jay
tongue twisters i agree these are fun i
love these looks
all right let me let me have a crack at
this one she
sell seashells on the seashore faster
she sells seashells on the seashore you
can do better than that
she sells seashells on the seashore
it's a marathon right yes but this is a
great way once you've been slowly and
accurately practicing these sounds to
really ramp up and increase the speed
because that's going to train you to
make these sounds under pressure
like in a conversation or like in an
exam situation
nice and the other thing about
pronunciation which we should mention is
you mentioned going to the gym before
pronunciation is muscular isn't it
indeed
it builds you know the work builds on
top of each other
um you know it can be painful at times
but it is worth it
yeah so when you learn grammar you have
to really it's a it's a
cognitive mental psychological thing
because you're thinking about some
abstract conceptual rule
but with pronunciation you're actually
moving
tongues and cheeks and literally a
muscle you are building
and training your tongue which is a
muscle so
these tongue twisters are good practice
definitely
i'm going to show you my favorite one oh
wow okay you better do this one
now i learnt this tongue twister when i
was quite young and i tell you what
everybody has a favorite
tongue twister that they learn how to do
i'm not good at all tongue twisters
right but if i say so myself
i'm quite good at this one okay let's
try i'll do it slowly
first of all so you can hear the word so
it's betty bought a bit of butter
so we're practicing the sound yep
okay are you ready go betty put a bit
about about the bird
was better but i got another bit of
butter and mixed it with a bit of butter
to make a better banana
let me try betty bought a bit of butter
but the bitter butter betty bought was
bitter so betty bought another bit of
butter and mix it with a bitter
bit of butter to make a better bit of
butter
bravo holy moly
okay so we just looked at the sounds
of english and we found out that there
are 44
sounds and we found out that some of
these sounds will be in your first
language and they'll be exactly the same
some will be slightly different and some
you're not going to have at all
what else did we find out about these
sounds well we looked at the
relationship between
spelling and how the word sounds so the
difference there
knowing which sounds represent which
letters
and how you cannot trust english
spelling because
the relationship between the spelling
and the sounds is crazy
although you know there's a solution to
this oh we have a spelling course
on e2 school so this will be
your new best friend in terms of
spelling isn't that clever
what else did we learn we learned about
uh voiced and unvoiced
that's exactly right so the two types of
consonants we turn our voice
off for unvoiced per and we turn it
on for voiced and we learnt the hand
trick so
remember unvoiced no vibration
voiced you will feel your throat move
under your fingers
sweet and we also learned that of the 44
sounds we have vowels and of the vowels
we have
short long and combined and we also have
consonants which are sounds that you
make that use a piece of your mouth
exactly where it blocks or changes
the flow of air in some way all right
let's move on from sounds
and move up to something not necessarily
trickier but a little bit higher
exactly this so first of all we looked
at the pieces of the puzzle
right now we're going to start putting
them together how exciting
so next let's look at consonant clusters
what's wrong jay uh what's a consonant
cluster
now i know that the name sounds a little
bit scary but it's actually
really simple it just means two
or three or sometimes four
consonants that are next to each other
so no vowels in between them okay
all right this sounds cool let's take a
look they're a lot of fun
so consonant clusters are divided into
two groups
you have initial clusters which come at
the start
of a word so we can see here on the left
we've got
black so we've got the two consonants
[Music]
blur
is a consonant cluster that's precisely
correct and the trick with consonant
clusters you have to be
very careful not to put a vowel in
between them
so don't say ba
you want to join them as close together
as you can
black uh once upon a time i lived in
south korea
and the koreans loved to put a vowel
between the consonants they would say
black indeed this is black this is
something that uh
japanese speakers of english will do too
okay
so we can also see here that there are
initial consonant clusters that means
they come at the start of the word
and there's one there that has three
consonants
spring beautiful spring my favorite
season
exactly is it nice now when we look at
initial clusters
there are no four consonant initial
clusters
in english so that's a relief however
there are for the final clusters so
let's go through them
with final clusters let's look at the
two consonant cluster one
first so remember these come at the end
of a syllable or word
mint so sorry
exactly
precisely now let's amp up the
difficulty a little bit
we've got benz bends
lovely
crazy bends this is another example of
the difference between the sound and the
spelling
because the spelling is with the letter
s but remember we pronounce this with
the
z voiced sound gotcha
all right now you up for a real
challenge oh honestly i speak english as
a first language and i find this word
hard to pronounce ready me too me too
you go first
all right six
it started off well yeah so here we've
got
four consonants in a row we've got
again six
and to make this when you've got your
tongue in that position
you've got to push it forward for the
thu and then
back again for the s so
this is ballet for the tongue it is this
is where the gracefulness
of your movements needs to happen sixth
sixth crazy all right i like these
consonant clusters these look fun
what else have we got well there are
many consonant cluster
groups so we group them by the common
sound within them all okay so here we're
looking at the
s cluster group for initial clusters at
the start of a word
so let's go through them i'll take you
through the different examples
so s and k combine to make
sk or scary
sleep smile
sneeze sport
star sweet you do the rest
screen split
spring street
square once again here we've got another
little difference between the sound
and the spelling so s q
is represented by s k in the phonetic
alphabet ah
okay all right cool so what i feel like
is happening now ambo is we've gone from
those initial
single sounds like and now we're putting
them together and i
feel like we're becoming more and more
what's the word
clear we're getting clearer precisely
it's like
building the accuracy up you know you
start with accuracy of the individual
parts
and then you add them together it's like
maths you add the pieces together come
up with the correct answer
all right i have a question for you so
there's 44
individual sounds how many consonant
clusters are there in
english well the figure is 146.
but these are divided into different
groups so we've got
five initial consonant cluster groups
and
we've got ten of final consonant cluster
groups
okay and how can i practice these 146
consonant clusters where can i go to
learn this
head on over to www dot
and you can sign up for the speaking lab
advanced
course this is where you will find our
consonant clusters
fantastic here is a screenshot of the
speaking lab advanced course which will
take you
through all of the consonant clusters in
english
and help you to say them perfectly
cool i like consonant clusters they're
fun you're getting their cert
and the pert together or even the spro
is there
spring springs spring got it there you
go oh straw
so they're kind of tricky and you
probably need to practice them right
definitely practice is the key to
success when it comes to clusters
because you can really have them in all
sorts of different combinations
plus it's a great way to practice your
knowledge of individual
consonant sounds too nice nice nice and
it's next level but
if we really want to go to the next next
level we need to talk about
fluency indeed now this is truly my
favorite aspect of pronunciation because
once you have learned
these rules these magic keys to
pronunciation
you are going to see and hear these
everywhere
in songs on tv on the radio
trust me you'll notice them all around
you
okay let's now talk about fluency
all right so there are five
ways to improve your fluency okay and
we're going to go through them
one by one in this next section wait
wait wait wait wait what is fluency what
does this mean
well fluency is how we join sounds
together
when we speak okay in fact it's one of
the key things to sounding
natural when you talk nice this is
important
so the first way and one of the most
common ways that we sound more fluent is
by
linking sounds we also add
sounds we delete sounds
we change them and we combine
them so we're talking here about
combining
words so imagine this verbal word comes
out and we say another
word and it's the connection between the
two right precisely
that's exactly so but there are slight
differences in how we do it depending on
what sounds you have in
this word or that word all right this
sounds fun let's take a look let's jump
in
okay so we're going to start with
linking sounds now you may have heard of
this rule
before when you have a word
that ends in a consonant and the next
word starts with a vowel
sound you link them so
for example let's look at these words
here we've got three words
like which ends in what consonant sound
jay cur
yes now the next word an starts with the
schwa so that's a vowel
sound and then its second letter is a
consonant again
so no and now our third word here starts
with a vowel
i as in ice so we need to link them
here's what it looks like
like and nice like a nice
like an ice what's like an ice well
it'll help more if we put it in
a question would you like an ice cream
okay
so let me get this right we're not
saying would you
like an ice cream because that would
sound like a robot
it does sound like a robot when you
separate all the words out
so so sorry so a native english speaker
if they're offering you
an ice cream they wouldn't say would you
like an ice cream they say
would you like like a nice like an ice
cream and there's a rule there that you
just mentioned
like an ice cream that's the rule so you
take
that first consonant and you push it
over
to the vowel so an ice becomes
a nice a nice
okay i scream you scream we scream for
ice cream
yes so here are some more examples
using this first linking rule so
my name is nay miss dave
my name is dave my name is jay my name
is amber
another example we've got live in
india but we don't want to say those as
three separate words we want to link
them
live in india live in india
so it's almost like india starts with
india
live in india wow and then final one is
a question
when is it when is it
right okay so just quickly this is
probably why people find it so difficult
to
listen and understand native speakers
right
because what we're doing is we're doing
all this crazy stuff with the language
and again
the relationship between the written
english
and the spoken english is so different
so you probably studied english for ages
in high school and you know your
vocabulary and your grammar
and you go to america or australia and
you think what i don't understand
anybody
it's because we're applying all of these
rules
exactly and for us the rules are
automatic
we learn to do them from a young age but
you can learn to do them too
although it does take a little bit of
memory that little bit of awareness and
practice
at the start to go to hey i need to link
here or i need to add a sound here
but very soon you'll start to be a
natural they'll feel like
second nature nice i like that awareness
and practice that's the key
definitely truly
okay so next we're going to look at how
to add sounds
this is probably my favorite rule it's
also one of the most powerful
fluency rules cool so let's take a
closer look
there are four sounds that we add
so let's look at the first sound
here's the rule when the first word ends
in one of these three
vowel sounds ooh ow
and the next word starts with any vowel
doesn't matter can be anything as long
as it's a vowel
we add the sound
so let me give you an example take
this adjective blue it ends in
blue and the next word is eyes
so i could say i have blue eyes
but to make it sound far more natural i
say
blue wise you have blue eyes
i have blue y's gotcha and that could be
confusing again
for listening because you're thinking
why are you talking about blue
y's right because wise is a noun oh so
my goodness wise is an adjective
that it is in english i am not very wise
you are extremely wise that's why it can
be so confusing listening because you
think you're somebody's talking about
being
wise but they're talking about blue eyes
because of this little rule
exactly crazy stuff let's look at some
examples
so my cat has blue eyes
or we can look at these three here
so again she has blue eyes
how are you that's one of the most
common questions we learned right at the
beginning how
why you okay so right let me
okay so i have been taught since i was
five years old to say how are you but
that is completely
unnatural incorrect yeah the one lovely
thing about this though is that often
with this rule the words have clues
in them if you take a look at the
spelling how ends with the letter
w even though when we say the word on
its own it's just
how how but the w reminds us to
insert before another word how
were you got it same with the example
over here
throw wet to me throw it to me
got it another good one would be
something like go
away when you join them go away
got it go while way very strange
so that's rule number one let's look at
rule number two for adding sounds
so when you have a word that ends in air
or or and the next word starts with a
vowel
we add
so let's look at this example we have
the continent
asia ends in the schwa
and the next word could be and when we
put them together in a sentence we say
asia rand europe our continents
asia rand not asia and europe
right asia and europe huh there you go
asia rand that's it ready for rule
number three
please jump on in so
this time if the first word ends in e
e a i or oy
and the next word starts again with any
vowel this time we add
the y sound like in the word you
[Music]
here's an example word on the left says
hi i is the vowel i
the next word starts with the vowel a
altitude
i could say high altitude but it would
sound far better for me to say
high altitudes so we added sound between
them
it's a soft sound yeah it's quite subtle
but it makes a huge difference
yeah so some more examples i'm flying at
a high
altitude and now let's look at examples
for all of the
vowel sounds that were listed so e as in
she
she is she is she is happy
we've seen the high altitude one already
but in a sentence it would be
he's at a high altitude oi as in
boy a boy yand a girl boy and a girl
a as in today today is the 20th
and then finally we've got the short
vowel e as in taxi
the taxi is here
so it's a powerful rule and it's a very
common rule because these vows are
frequently used
okay i have a question so it's hard for
me to memorize these rules so
what should i do because i can't be
thinking of these rules while i'm also
saying a sentence in a conversation
what to do well my tip is to recognize
which words this rules applies to
because these rules are quite common for
example she the subject pronoun
she and then the be verb is right you're
going to be using
that combo of subject pronoun and verb
all the time
so even though it does take that tiny
bit of practice at the start to remember
okay
she is she is
when you learn that rule you memorize it
and then you use it often
it's going to become automatic nice nice
nice
and like you said earlier awareness is
the first step
and then practice so start by listening
to songs that have lyrics
you know where she is or um a boy and
something like that and you almost need
to forget the written
english right yes and just close your
eyes and listen to this listen to what
is
actually said not what you see is a
written form because that's
well the relationship's not there
exactly yeah
so let's finish up with rule number four
this one is when you the first word ends
in the
z sound and the next word starts with
yeah so this one's a little bit
different this time we add the
je sound here's an example
where's and the second word
you're so separately it's
where's your but here we're adding this
where's joe oh where's your
where does your home work it's jour it
sounds french it does
jour but indeed in english we've got
this
inclusion of this sound and it will make
a big difference if you use it
where's your where's your homework
sounds so natural ah
nice okay next we're looking at
deleting sounds so i do this quite often
now in english we tend to delete these
three sounds the most right
and the tip to remember is that we
delete them when they
are at the end of a word don't delete
them when they're at the start
um for and but with her we do want to
delete that at the start
so just a little difference there but
we'll look at some more examples
okay so can i try these three yeah go
for it so
it must be if i say where's your
homework and i say well
it must be at home it must
must be it must be so i don't say it
must
be and i don't hit the t t sound i say
it must be at home miss exactly i
suppose a good point to mention is that
you
certainly can say these sounds if you
want to
this this fluency rule is a bit more
optional
fluency rule number one for linking
fluency rule number two for adding
sounds
it's really important that you do those
two rules
right but this one it can depend on your
mood it also depends on your accent
um you know for us as native speakers
i may do this less with a british accent
than an australian speaker might got it
and also with social context because if
i'm hanging out with my friends versus
speaking to the queen which i do all the
time naturally
yes so hello what about this second one
here so
you and me you and me you and me you
and me sounds a bit weird it does you
and me bit odd hey so you'll hear a lot
of english speakers doing this often
dropping the d in and we also have this
with fish and chips
instead of fish and chips rock and roll
exactly good one now the final one i saw
him we could say i saw him but
a lot of native speakers will drop the
ha and just go i saw him
right yep makes sense that sounds
natural to me it does
so let's look at a couple other examples
for each sound have a go at this if you
want to pause the video try these out
yourself
so for two we've got these ones have a
go jay
ready so uh it must be true it
must be true i'll take the first one
first one not first one and
of course i didn't do it i didn't
do it i didn't do it i didn't do it
exactly
and often with this sometimes you'll
almost make half a sound
like you wouldn't say i didn't do it
like that yeah you're sort of you'll
bring your top touch
tongue up hug you didn't do it like that
instead of it
so have a practice see what you enjoy
doing but this rule is optional
for whatever you feel comfortable with
and and again i think the key here is to
just
listen to what is actually said in
english
not what is written or probably not what
you've been taught did i say unless you
study at e2 school
indeed one other little tip is that when
it comes to deleting sounds as you
mentioned earlier
when you're talking with friends in an
informal context that can be fine
but possibly in an exam or if you're
talking to the queen
you might want to include these sounds
more just for accuracy and precision
nice so that the examiner knows that you
can do them yeah
all right let's look at the ones for d
so we've got you and me i used to have a
car
fish and chips and so
once again you know how we use sounds in
english this is so common that you will
see
signs spelled like this with just the
fish and like that fish and chips nice
okay here are the examples for her i
saw him i shouldn't have i haven't seen
her
you'll notice that i've also put the t
in
a gray color here to show you that you
could
or choose not to include it so with it
included
i shouldn't i shouldn't have i haven't
seen her but then i can also delete it i
shouldn't have
i haven't seen her like that got it
ready to look at some magic all right i
like magic let's do it
well i'm not going to pull a rabbit out
of a hat but i am going to change some
sounds for you
cool so here is our
first rule when the first word ends in
the
t sound and the next word starts with a
yeah sound for example what and
you we change it to
what you uh-huh what you're gonna do
what you're doing this is a super common
rule and
one of the most helpful that you're here
today here's an example in a restaurant
have you decided what you want
ah so she doesn't say have you decided
what you
want she says have you decided what chew
what you what you want
what she wants what's your what's your
what you want beastie boys yes
good one all right
next rule when the first word ends in d
the second again starts with yeah like
did you this time we change it to
j which we can see here in green this is
the j
sound like in the word jam so combined
it becomes
did you did you
did you know there's a sale on ah right
okay okay let's hit this again so he
doesn't say
did you because that would be honestly
it's just hard to say that it's hard to
say deed
and you as two separate things they just
naturally want to create magic there
say did you did you did you exactly and
the really cool thing is that these
rules
evolved from convenience because we were
being lazy we didn't want to say
did you so the rule came into being
because we wanted
something easier to say nice did you
nothing wrong with being lazy
exactly at times at times
okay the next changing rule when the
first word ends in the
s sound and once again the second word
starts with a
yeah sound for example pass
and you're we need to change it to a
sh sound so this sound
this is the sound you make when you want
somebody to be quiet right
shh it's kind of a universal sound
you've probably heard a teacher do this
at some point in the past so this is an
easy sound to make
passion partial sure so if we look at
this
in a context
hey check the scores did you pass your
exam
pass sure what's partial it passed and
you're but
joined together partial partial nice
that sounds natural to me
me too all right well we're on to the
final fluency rule uh-huh how are you
feeling
not too much information well it is
there's a lot here but it's all good i
just want to keep learning this stuff
and just maintaining my awareness of it
because i know that at some point i'll
have to practice but
so be it let's keep going exactly and i
find if you
pause this video and you really practice
and revise
each rule take in a little bit at a time
a little bit more knowledge every day
it will help feel more manageable cool
okay so here's the combination rule this
is a lovely
easy rule to remember very simple so
when a word ends in a consonant
and the next word starts with the same
consonant
the same sound we combine them
so for example i love drinking tea
so we could have hot and tea
but we don't want to say two sounds we
want to make it into one
so hot tea right hot tea
nice and this is definitely another
convenience rule here we're being a
little bit lazy aren't we
absolutely yeah so we could say here's
some hot tea
hot tea hot tea hot tea hot tea
love it now here's the next combining
rule
when you have a word ending in either da
and the next word starts with any one of
those same
four sounds for example hot
dog what we do is we delete
the first sound so the sound that is at
the end of the first
word and then we join them perfect
hot dog hot dogs hot dogs yeah
so for example you might be at a
barbecue one hot dog for you
okay but not a hot dog because that
would be weird and not a hot
og either
so let's put all of these rules together
that we've been learning now we've got a
text up here and it's amazing to see
this because you can see how frequently
they're used
and how all these rules help each other
to make you sound more fluent
so i'm going to read through this text
now for you listen carefully to
where i'm using these different rules
they're color-coded so check as you
listen
along doctors are giving new advice for
people with coughs
they are advising people not to visit a
doctor to get
treatment instead if you have a cough
what you need to do is drink or eat
honey or get medicine from a pharmacy
did you know that honey has
antibacterial properties
the doctors say that in most cases honey
and over-the-counter medicines will work
and people don't need antibiotics they
say antibiotics do little to make a
cough go away
the doctors added that most of the time
a cough will improve on its own within
two to three weeks
even if you take nothing self-care and
rest are also
important for healing
okay oh my god that's amazing all right
so
in that text there what we're seeing is
a written paragraph of text and we're
seeing actually how it transforms
into spoken english and all of the
different fluency rules that are applied
there right
exactly and they all work together to
help
anybody speaking sound more natural more
fluent
more like an english native speaker it's
incredible all right so what are the
fluency rules again we've got
linking yes adding deleting
changing and combining perfect and
let me show you a quick little review
cool so we'll go over it one more time
good here are the five ways to improve
your fluency with examples
you link words together so an egg
becomes an egg
an egg an egg fine you add
extra sounds so for example true or
false
should be true war false got it true or
number three we often delete sounds used
to
for example we create new sounds
so don't you becomes don't shoot
pussycat doll song
and then number five you can combine the
same sounds
so for example social life ends with le
starts with love becomes social life
i don't know what to say honestly it's
incredible it is magic this is
pronunciation
that's that's it that's what it's all
about indeed
whoa all right fluency is really cool i
like that a lot they are
seriously some magical rules that'll
help you sound much more
natural now don't forget in the
description below we have the
downloadable
free ultimate guide to pronunciation so
make sure you get that now
amber i have a question for you okay uh
do you like sounds consonant clusters
or fluency the best first of all that's
an impossible question
i love them all but do you know what you
just did jay
what did i do you used some intonation
beautifully to ask me actually a list
question oh intonation is this another
magical rule
indeed ready to find out let's do it
let's go for it
okay so in this section you're going to
learn what intonation
is so jay tell me do you play a musical
instrument uh i play the didgeridoo
which probably doesn't count here
no it most certainly does it has it goes
up and down
in its pictures nice yup so
if you play a musical instrument you'll
recognize this information on screen
but even if you don't play one you will
have listened to music
and you'll know that music has different
pictures from low
to high so we've got here do re mi fa
goes from low up up up up like that
and english is exactly the same
it has different pictures too okay but
we call this
intonation right so it's how we move our
voice from going from a low pitch
to a medium pitch to a high pitch and
back down
right cool so
we use different patterns for different
things in english have very specific
patterns
so let's jump into those first great
okay so today we're going to begin with
the five
different types of question intonation
now you know mostly people say oh it's
easy when you
ask a question you make your voice go up
well that is true but not all the time
so let's find out when to do it and when
not to do that
so we're going to start with wh
questions so jay what are wh
words uh who what when where why in for
some reason how
i know it's like the imposter isn't it
well when you have a question that
starts with one of these wh words
we use this pattern now notice where the
blue dot
is in the pattern and then check the
questions you'll see
part of the sentence or the question in
blue
so that part corresponds with the dot
so it'll make sense when you hear it i
i've completely forgotten
what's your name jay
and there we have the question what's
your name
so the is the highest part
of how i'm lifting my voice what's your
name and then i bring it back down
what's the departure time what's the
departure time
beautiful when's dinner
right i remember that mom when's dinner
i'm hungry
and then we've got who is that so
sometimes you can make the difference
subtle who is that
or you can make it even more extreme who
is that
got it so that is the pattern for wh
questions this is another type of
question
so we call this type repetition or
clarification questions
basically it's when you ask somebody to
say something
again or for a second time right so i
could be feeling
really forgetful today you've told me
your name but i missed it
so i'll say what was your name again
jay got it won't forget this time
so with this pattern we start with our
voice at a medium level then we bring it
down
what was what was what was your name
again
what was that departure time
when did you say dinner was nice
that's all good who is that again
so this is pattern amazing
all right now this is the type that
you'll probably know the pattern
of because it's one of the most common
question types it's
yes or no questions so what is a yes or
no question jay
uh it's it's a question that in the
answer
requires a yes or no answer exactly
so let me ask you a question are you
hungry yes
always am i correct yes
and did you get the bus today no
so you can see that this patent applies
even if the question is short
am i correct or if it's a longer
question
did you get the bus today and you can
see here with the green and the blue
parts
that's where you raise your voice so in
the final
two syllables uh-huh okay wait so this
word
hungry has two syllables right exactly
hung and gree okay so it goes hung on
the
first syllable and then greece so it
goes up from the first to the second
syllable
exactly hungry hungry so if i ask you
a question but i don't use this
intonation pattern
i say jay are you hungry what right
and you don't know that it's a question
that i'm asking yeah it doesn't sound
like a question
no because our brain hears the pitch
as much as it hears the words are you
hungry
am i correct did you get the bus today i
also sound really bored
too it sounds boring yeah yeah so make
sure you use this pattern for this
question type
all right so the next question type is
either or questions
so an either or question is when you
give someone two options
for example you might be at a restaurant
and the waiter says
do you want soup or salad would you like
tea
or coffee your teacher might say
do you agree or disagree do you work
or are you a student so what happens
here is the first part of the sentence
we
rise we take up would you like to
and then the second little bit we bring
down
or coffee okay so wait let me try let me
try would you like
tea or coffee magic yeah you've got it
cool and now lucky last the final type
of question intonation
is lists so this is the question you
asked me at the start of the section
so let's try it again do you want water
juice lemonade or cordial
all of them all of them and just like
the question j
asked earlier what was it do you prefer
sounds consonant clusters or fluency
that's it beautiful intonation pattern
again you lift
everything and you can do this as long
as you want you can have 10 things in
the list that's fine
you lift lift lift lift lift but the
last one
you bring down that's the rule got it so
amber do you prefer paris london or
berlin paris definitely fair enough
okay so now we're going to test your
memory of the rules that you just
learned
fantastic you're going to see an
activity with patterns on the left
and questions on the right your task is
to match these patterns
with the correct question type we'll
give you
how long 10 seconds 10 seconds to do it
think fast
and here are the answers so we begin
with the either or pattern for a
b is the repetition or clarification
c wh question d yes or no question
and finally e was our list question
now okay know that's a lot of
information yes
but there is still a bit more to go
through come on let's do it
next we're going to look at sentence
intonation patterns
okay so jay do you remember the wh
question pattern of course like what's
your name
beautiful well here it is
for reference the good news
is that simple sentences follow exactly
the same
person so let's take a look at some
examples
i'm from england i have two kids
i've just sent you an email my favorite
film is titanic
oh well oh no hold on hold on so these
are not questions these are
sentences exactly affirmative sentences
correct short simple one clause
sentences but they still have intonation
like there's still a part of the
sentence that rises
and then falls exactly that we lift just
to give that bit of interest
a common mistake that a lot of students
make is to make their intonation
totally flat right when they're not
asking a question
but that can be a problem because it can
make you sound bored
and it can also make you harder to
understand because our ears are
listening
for that little lift or rise and what
sorry what is this little
lift does it mean i make my sound a
little bit louder
is it what is it definitely so as you
raise the pitch of your voice you go
higher you go
up but you can also push that sound out
a little bit more
on the highest note so it's just a
smidge
louder okay so i'm raising my pitch and
maybe making it
turning up the volume just a little bit
turn that notch up
i'm from england nice very subtle
you don't want to say i'm from england
right
or i'm from england but you just want to
emphasize it a touch more got it all
right now
next question jay do you remember the
list
pattern yes do you like water
cheese or cheesecake oh definitely
cheesecake
well once again here it is for your
reference
some more excellent news it's the same
pattern when we
list things in sentences so instead of
do you prefer
paris london blah blah blah you could
say
i went to paris london prague and berlin
last year
berlin last year exactly this one's a
bit longer than last year
we've added last year
another example you want to do the
honors yes
we've got white wheat sourdough and rye
toast
lovely so remember the trick is up up up
up up
and then the final part of your list you
pull it down gently okay
finally last little bit come on we're
going to look at complex
sentences cool so this is really handy
if you're doing a read aloud task
and it's a paragraph for example and the
sentences may be complex with clauses in
them
so if the sentence has two clauses
this is the pattern you follow have a
listen
when you get home give me a call
to speak to someone press number four
as of the 23rd of june your plan will be
active
i live at unit 806 at 56
smith street so on all of those little
syllables that were blue
they were the highest part of my voice
right okay
these are the rules for the three clause
sentences
by the way this is really handy for
phone numbers too it
follows the same pattern so for
a three clause sentence when you get
home
if you have time give me a call
for our phone number my number is 0428
345 621
and then last one ready yep i was born
on a
tuesday 8th of may 1991.
lovely although the last one try lifting
up that
90 bit higher 1991.
magic you've got it now this is to say
that often as native speakers we play
around with these rules
we don't follow them super strictly like
just as jaded then
and kept the last bit flat that's
perfectly fine and you'll hear a lot of
native speakers do that too
these rules however if you're doing an
exam yeah it's good to show that you
know them and almost exaggerate them a
little bit
but in everyday life just a little bit
of exaggeration
exactly but you know outside of an exam
feel free to use them
or not as you choose with sentences with
questions
always use them but with sentences you
can be a bit more relaxed yep
okay so did you learn something new
there hopefully you learned how to use
intonation really
nicely because intonation's fun isn't it
it's a lot of fun it's almost like
singing yeah pronunciation singing
yeah it adds a lot of meaning to the
things that you say which is very
helpful
but what we're going to talk about now
is going to be really
really relevant for some people and
still of interest to other people and
the thing is we're talking about is word
stress exactly right the reason why i
say it's going to be particularly
relevant for some people is because you
simply will not have it in your first
language
correct right but other languages will
that's
that's very true and english is one of
them so
let's find out cool so let's talk about
word stress
well first of all what is word stress
well every word in english consists of
one or more
syllables so for example
medication has four syllables
now what is a syllable well a syllable
is like a beat
it's a part of a word so medication
we can break it up into four beats
here they are separated medication
now this is a word with four syllables
and the rule is that in words with
two or more syllables one syllable
in the word is stressed so by stressed
we make it
stronger or louder or more emphasized
exactly so with this word medication
it's on the third syllable medication
now like jay was saying before
it can be quite different in your first
language
with stress patterns to english so for
example if we take a look at tamil
in tamil the rule is that you stress the
first syllable in a word
always so we've got some tamil words
here
and we're going to listen to a recording
of these words
all right so could you hear how the
speaker was stressing the first
syllable well in english we stress
different syllables in different words
so here are some example stress patterns
product so the stresses on the first
syllable
construct beautiful
amazing so these are all different
patterns that we use
okay so wait let me get this right so we
don't just say
uh mei zing like equal syllable on
sorry equal stress on each syllable we
actually take one of the syllables
amazing and we make them amazing
much more emphasized right exactly right
louder and
stronger and it changes it could be at
the beginning could be in the middle or
it could be at the end
very true so we're going to look at some
examples actually of
different placements now terrific so
just to have a slightly different topic
let's look at some healthcare vocab
so here we've got different columns on
the left we've got
one syllable words so here because it's
just one syllable the stress is even
it's
pill nurse blood
but when there are two or more syllables
we follow different patterns
so let's look at column two we've got
doctor
pressure patient column three
we're reversing the pattern now to the
second syllable
acute prescribe disease
fourth column three syllables allergy
hospital ambulance
and then fifth column the stress is in
the middle
allergic reaction discomfort
okay can i play a little game here most
definitely all right so please have a
look at number
four here the column number four and
what i'm going to do is i'm going to
put the wrong emphasis on the i'm going
to put emphasis on the wrong syllable
so instead of allergy which is correct i
could say
allergy oh and i say what what are you
saying
exactly it's almost as if i can't
understand allergy what does allergy
mean
yeah because i've just changed the word
stress there slightly
right allergy allergy very different
sound to my ears
exactly i would argue that word stress
is perhaps the single
biggest barrier to being understood by
others
yes if you use the wrong stress it's
very very difficult
yeah that's right uh i was speaking to
an
indian the other day and he was saying
something about something generic
right but but he didn't say generic with
the
j emphasis he said generic generic
and for a second i just went what is
that what's generic
exactly because our brain is so used to
hearing
the words with the correct stress
patterns that anything different
feels like whoa what's that yeah exactly
so here we've got a quick activity for
you to practice have a go at saying this
sentence will give you a model to listen
to
i had an allergic reaction so an
ambulance took me to hospital
the doctors gave me a pill pause the
video have a go
so jay you might be wondering or
students watching this video
how do we learn what stress pattern to
use
that is the million dollar question
really well
i will happily take that million dollars
because it's got a super easy answer
you just use the dictionary they are all
in there
so here's a little screenshot from an
online dictionary
and i've done it for the word construct
now you can see
that there's a tiny little apostrophe
here on screen
it comes in between the two syllables
con struct
now the apostrophe always goes before
the stressed syllable so if you see an
apostrophe before something
you need to stress the syllable after it
got it
okay wait wait wait wait wait so this is
construct but and and that's a verb
but what about what about a construct
indeed and by
changing the stress you've just told me
a noun a construct
so again sometimes the stress can even
change the meaning of the word
whoa pretty cool now another little tip
to know is that american and british
varieties of english can have
different stress patterns for the same
word
this doesn't happen very often but it's
just handy to know about
so for example an american speaker
would talk about going to the ballet
but me as a british speaker i talk about
going to the ballet
my very dodgy american accent see if you
can do a better job ballet
ballet ballet this is ballet ballet
yeah there you go so there are a couple
of words that this um
happens with ceylon and salon
another example
[Music]
now it's not just the stress that we put
on individual words it's also
how we use it with the sentence so you
can see here we've got the word we saw
earlier
amazing but we can also apply this to a
sentence
i saw you we found them
with four syllables we've got the word
education
but we can have the sentence mary saw
you
jay is a teacher wow okay um
so to figure out what to put where if
the word has
two syllables then we place it on the
stressed syllable two or more so that's
why it's
teacher but with the second sentence
here i
saw you and mary saw you
here we're actually stressing the key
part of the sentence the meaning the
most
important meaning word in the sentence
yup
got it all right so word stress i think
is absolutely
fantastic sure is but it must be
extremely challenging for those people
who have a first language that doesn't
have word stress uh-huh that's right but
you know the good news is that all the
rules are in the dictionary to learn
and by practice and you know learning
the word stress patterns of words that
you use
often yeah it'll be fine yeah awareness
and practice is key
plus e2 school indeed all right so we're
on to the very last part of our
pronunciation lesson today which is
rhythm so there are two types of
languages
in the world we have stress-timed
and syllable-timed languages right now
the easiest way
to compare these two is to use a picture
or an analogy so stress-time languages
think of it like morse code you have
long sections and
shorter sections
i'm guessing that english is going to be
like that most definitely
in contrast you have other languages
syllable time languages which
are much more even like a sewing machine
or like a train i guess all the parts
are
evenly spaced in terms of speed got it
so you're right english is a
stress-timed language this means we say
stressed syllables of words at
regular intervals like a beat right
we're going to practice this in a second
cool and we put all of the unstressed
syllables
we make them shorter we put them in
between the beads
right this is one of my favorite
activities to do
all right let's jump into it i'll do the
first one you do the second okay
great okay so i'm gonna start with this
one we're gonna have a beat
like this dogs annoy
cats the dogs have annoyed the cats the
dogs will annoy the cats the dogs have
been annoying the cats the dogs could
have been annoying the cats
so you see what i did there i kept the
beets on dogs annoy and
cats and i fit in words like the or
could have been
or the in between the beats
i love this this is amazing wait wait
wait wait wait have a look at these
words that are stressed here so
dogs noun annoy verb
cat noun yep exactly or subject verb
object stress these parts or
meaning words yes nouns and verbs which
have meaning like dogs
annoy these these have pictures in your
mind
whereas the have the will
have been these are meaningless words
they're kind of like the glue that stick
it together
exactly the grammar glue yes but not the
contents
all right you ready to try one yeah yeah
let's do it give you a beat or do you
want to do the beat yourself i'll do it
okay
cats drink milk the cats have drunk the
milk
the cats will be what the cats will
drink the milk
you just three feet
cats drink milk the cats have drunk the
milk
the cats will drink the milk the cats
have been drinking the milk
the cats could have been drinking the
milk could have been beautiful it sounds
so fluent
too amazing
emma that was amazing really really
amazing okay so i think what we've
done in this video is we've got every
single rule
of english pronunciation and we've
probably put everybody to sleep
at home hopefully not but truly that is
every rule you need to know
everything's in there you've just seen
everything awesome so
as a student if i were you what i would
do is download that pdf below which will
give you
all of these rules and what i would also
do is go to
www.e2school.com and i would check out
our two
speaking lab courses which will take you
through the sounds and the consonant
clusters
so you're going to become more confident
when speaking english and
more accurate clearer greed agreed
there's one more thing that i recommend
you do that's hit the subscribe button
as well we'll be adding plenty more
pronunciation videos to
our channel in the future emma thank you
so much
thanks jay
[Music]
you